President Thomas S. Monson has been on the Lord's errand all his life, from serving as president of his ward's teachers quorum in his teens, to serving as bishop in his early 20s, to presiding over a mission in his early 30s, to becoming a member of the Quorum of the Twelve at age 36.
For the 22 years prior to being set apart as 16th president of the Church on Feb. 3, 2008, President Monson served as counselor to three presidents: second counselor to President Ezra Taft Benson and President Howard W Hunter and, for nearly 13 years, first counselor to President Gordon B. Hinckley.
Five years after his call to the Twelve, he was given a special assignment for the work of the Church in Europe, requiring many visits with members behind the Iron Curtain in the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary. He had a key role in gaining permission from the East German government to build the Freiberg Germany Temple, which was dedicated in 1985, and in advancing the work of the Lord in other eastern European countries that were part of the communist bloc.
His life is associated with benevolence and compassion, serving others with a desire to nourish the weak and strengthen the weary. His role in the Church's welfare program has been characterized by one-on-one service.
He remembers how his father never spoke ill of another and would leave the room when others spoke disrespectfully or negatively. He often speaks of his  mother, who taught him compassion by her acts of service to others, particularly those who were hungry or in need.
On one occasion, on a cold winter's night, a knock came at Bishop Monson's door. A German man living in Ogden, Utah, began to weep as he told how his brother, a faithful member in Germany during World War II, and his family were moving from Germany to an apartment in Bishop Monson's ward. Then-Bishop Monson visited the apartment and found it woefully inadequate. The next morning during a ward welfare committee meeting, he described the challenge. Members offered their skills and services. When the family arrived three weeks later, they found new carpet and paint, adequate lighting and full cupboards. "The father ... buried his head in my shoulder and repeated the words, 'Mein Bruder, mein Bruder, mein Bruder."<br>
FAMILY: Born Aug. 21, 1927, in Salt Lake City to G. Spencer and Gladys Condie Monson; two brothers and three sisters; married Frances Beverly Johnson in the Salt Lake Temple on Oct. 7, 1948; three children: two sons, Tom and Clark; one daughter, Ann Dibb; eight grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren.<br>
CHURCH SERVICE: Called at age 22 as bishop of the Sixth-Seventh Ward in Salt Lake City, with some 1,080 members, including about 84 widows; called as counselor in a stake presidency at age 27; called as president of the Canadian Mission at age 31; served on several Church committees, including the Adult Correlation Committee, and helped pioneer the home teaching program of the Church; sustained on Oct. 4, 1963, at age 36 to the Quorum of the Twelve, and ordained an apostle on Oct. 10, 1963. As a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he supervised the missions in western America, the South Pacific, Mexico, Central America and Europe. After a number of years and following the policy of rotation, the European missions were transferred to another member of the Twelve; however, Elder Monson retained responsibility for all countries behind the Iron Curtain. He was instrumental in obtaining government approval for the construction of the Freiberg Germany Temple, served as chairman of the Scriptures Publication Committee and supervised the process which resulted in new editions of the Standard Works of the Church. Called on Nov. 10, 1985, as second counselor to President Ezra Taft Benson; called in 1994 as second counselor to President Howard W. Hunter and in 1995 as first counselor to President Gordon B. Hinckley; ordained and set apart on Feb. 3, 2008, as president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.<br>
EDUCATION: Graduated with honors from the University of Utah in 1948 with a degree in business; received an MBA from Brigham Young University, and received honorary Doctor of Laws degree from BYU, honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from Salt Lake Community College, honorary Doctor of Business from the University of Utah, honorary Doctor of Communication from Utah Valley University, honorary Doctor of Public Service from Southern Utah University, honorary Doctorate of humanities from Weber State University, and honorary Doctor of Humanities degree from Dixie State College of Utah.<br>
EMPLOYMENT: Began working for Deseret News in 1948 as assistant classified advertising manager; shortly thereafter he became classified advertising manager; he became an officer of Newspaper Agency Corporation in 1952, became sales manager of Deseret News Press in 1953, and later became assistant general manager; served as president of the Printing Industry of Utah and later served as a director of the Printing Industries of America; named general manager of Deseret Press upon returning home from serving as a mission president in Canada; chairman of the Deseret News board of directors for 19 years.<br>
CIVIC: Has served more than four decades on the National Executive Board of Boy Scouts of America; received Scout-ing's Silver Beaver and Silver Buffalo awards, International Scouting's highest award, the Bronze Wolf, and Scouts Canada's Silver Fox Award. In December 1981, he was appointed by U.S. President Ronald Reagan to serve on the President's Task Force for Private Sector Initiatives. He served in this capacity from December 1981 to December 1982 when the work of the task force was completed.<br>
President Monson died Jan 2, 2018, at age 90 in Salt Lake City, Utah.
